welcome to topcast and to a regular
episode
this is chapter seven of the fabric of
reality and it's going to serve mainly
as an introduction to the chapter proper
uh i expect however it's going to go for
well over half an hour even though it's
just an introduction because the
majority of the chapter is a dialogue a
fictional dialogue between david and the
so-called crypto inductivist the person
who is
trying to argue for
the gap that is left by the fact that
knowledge can't be scientific knowledge
isn't able to be justified in some way
shape or form and david presents the
counter argument to that it's nice for
me to be doing a regular episode
recently and i don't normally say these
things during a regular episode as to
what else is going on with my podcast
but recently what's been happening is
i've been doing unusual episodes so
yesterday i recorded a response episode
a response podcast it's also available
on youtube as a video to one of sam
harris's recent podcast that he did
that was titled the end of global order
which was a very pessimistic take on
some things that are happening now that
a particular author is extrapolating off
into the distant future and of course
prophesying about how everything is
going to get far far worse for us all so
have a look for that one in the podcast
feed and just before that i released a
video that i titled origins
this video was a discussion about the
first set of images five images released
by
the
james webb space telescope the new
telescope that's up there in orbit 1.5
million kilometers away from the earth
orbiting the sun and collecting data
evidence photographs images about the
deeper and deepest
regions of space and bringing back some
spectacular stuff and what i've tried to
do there is to fuse the worldview that
is summarized by what i speak about in
topcast here and what is in the
beginning of infinity and the writings
of david deutsch more broadly trying to
fuse these two things together what does
something like that space telescope have
to do with knowledge creation and
optimism and all of that great stuff
well there's a discussion there and
hopefully the video is quite
entertaining and because of the images
of the james webb space telescope
spectacular as well so have a look at
that one and i've also been doing live
streaming on youtube and they get
recorded and uploaded automatically
they're very little work for me people
have been asking me questions so they
also serve as amas and i've been doing
pre-recorded amas as well and then
finally there is my sub stack newsletter
which also is a separate podcast in and
of itself so i've been busy recently and
this is the next episode all about the
fabric of reality but also in the works
and what will probably come out before
this one
is my discussion of the next chapter of
stephen pinker's book which is primarily
focused upon bay's theorem bayesian
reasoning so-called bayesian reasoning
and so i talk at length at great length
all about that particular chapter as
well as what i see as the deep
misconceptions for epistemology that
come out of a
too serious reading of the capacity of
bayes theorem to really do much at all
when it comes to either the creation or
the validation of knowledge let's say
all right without further ado and with
no more introduction let's get into an
introduction to
chapter seven a conversation about
justification or david and the crypto
inductivists from the fabric of reality
and before i get to the readings i have
to mention that at the beginning of the
audio book which is the fabric of
reality well worth picking up david
deutch himself does an introduction well
worth the price of the book itself and
what he says there is that
of the things that he would change in
the book were he writing it now would be
the use of terminology in this
particular chapter because
david is not a justificationist
david does not endorse justificationism
and so the whole point of the chapter is
to reject
justificationism that's where he's
coming from however he is speaking in
the language of people the overwhelming
majority of philosophers and scientists
and just the common man who speak this
way who talk about
justificationism and how things are
justified
so he has trouble trying to convey the
ideas using their language so that we
are speaking a common language that's
always the hard part in philosophy and
science to try and understand exactly
what the other person is saying they can
be speaking english they can be speaking
your native tongue but that doesn't mean
you've really got a
common language there is still a layer
of translation that goes on because
you're interpreting one another there is
no such thing as an unambiguous language
david says or as papa likes to say it is
impossible to speak in such a way as to
not be misunderstood and so all of these
caveats i am putting here because david
himself is saying that he would rephrase
things were he writing this chapter now
but i don't think we can blame him i
don't think we can blame because he's a
pioneer of a kind trying to bring these
ideas to the masses now popper of course
was their first in many many ways but
even poppa you can see if you go to his
first major work which was called the
logic of scientific discovery it's the
one book that i typically do not
recommend to people because it's
long
it's interesting if you're interested in
the philosophy of science but it's
highly technical
it's laborious
and it is in particular
written in the language of philosophers
of his era so he knows his audience his
peers other philosophers all of whom are
inductivists of a kind all of whom
believe in this justified true belief
conception of knowledge so he is very
much speaking to other philosophers
writing in a technical way
and so trying to bring people along with
him to explain
new ideas in a new way new ways of
understanding what science is what
knowledge is and how it's created so how
do you do that given that people have
never heard this stuff before well
you're going to talk about things like
confirmation and corroboration and
being justified
verifying things or not verifying things
you're introducing this new concept of
falsification and refutation
you're trying to say that knowledge is
never justified you can't prove things
as true all you can do is conjecture
this is very new and counterintuitive
look it is decades since there has been
a lineage of people following in the
tradition of papa ever since and we are
still
still having great difficulty conveying
these ideas true though they are but you
can say this about any true idea try to
teach someone newtonian physics for the
first time i mean it's been centuries so
of course people still learning this
stuff find it difficult try then
teaching them special relativity then
general relativity much less quantum
theory anything new that is
trying to get at reality has nuance to
it has a way of using language which
might be different even though the words
sound familiar to people
all of this stuff comes to bear on any
technical explanation of an area of
expertise so to speak an area of
knowledge a way of understanding reality
and the world epistemology and the
philosophy of science our business in
our specific business in this chapter
here is absolutely no different except
that maybe it's more difficult still
because at least when people go into
something like
learning areas of physics like learning
areas of general relativity let's say
their mind is really open because they
think well this stuff works we know that
there's technology out there based upon
this so i am willing to grant certain
assumptions just so i can move forward
and understand the thing as a whole so
that then when i finally
get to the point where i say i
understand it i can look back and
realize all the misconceptions i had
this is often not the way in which
people approach things like epistemology
in my experience
someone will say they're interested in
epistemology interested in having the
discussion about papa's ideas or david
deutsch's ideas but they go into the
discussion thinking but i already know
how knowledge works i know that i can be
certain of particular things
i know that you can be justified that
you can prove things that the evidence
shows some particular thing happens to
be true
that there is a
matter of fact about the science which
is settled all of that stuff
is baggage that people accumulate
through their schooling and education
and so then when you try to present them
with the ideas that much of that is
completely and utterly misconceived you
have great difficulty whereas someone
coming to something like general
relativity has no preconceived notions
or insofar as they do they understand
all of these physicists they're experts
out there and they all agree that
general relativity is the explanation of
gravity so
let me also gain that knowledge and i'm
willing to go along for the ride to try
and understand it
not so with epistemology to the same
extent because philosophers broadly
speaking don't agree with papa and
because they don't agree with papa
why should i
if this brett hall fellow or david
deutsch
are telling me that this is the way in
which knowledge is created
but they are a slim minority view
amongst the intellectual community
why should they be trusted over anyone
else and again even that is the wrong
question
because we don't think that trust is
actually a way in which you assess the
validity of ideas
we don't judge the
source of an idea
we instead try to error correct it's a
whole world view it's a particular
epistemology it's a way of understanding
stuff and creating knowledge and so this
is the hill we have to climb and this is
the hill we're about to climb today
so in saying all that that now is an
introduction to david deutsch's
introduction to the fabric of reality in
the audiobook where he says
that he regrets using the word
justification and justified so often
particularly in this chapter now i
readily forgive him for this because
i think that again he is
meeting the opponents halfway
that pedagogically speaking in terms of
trying to help people learn these ideas
you have to bring them with you by
granting the words that they're using as
we say there's no such thing as an
unambiguous language now writing today
in light of what was written back then
with the fabric of reality the fabric of
reality was like a step required in
order to bring us to the point where we
could understand the beginning of
infinity and so this was the first step
for many many people of taking them out
of their slumber of thinking justified
true belief for example is the way in
which knowledge works and that induction
is required in order to
somehow rather give us confidence in the
theories of science so that induction
indeed is able to generate theories of
science all of which is misconceived
but you have to start somewhere and so
people are typically starting at that
point and so chapter seven here is going
to use those words the
terms of
the people who have the misconceptions
the traditional view
and i think the way in which to
interpret this is david is holding your
hand and bringing you along through the
mire of misconception
but sometimes has to use the words of
those people who endorse the false
theories because that's almost everyone
here i want to sort of give props to
wittgenstein which i don't often do but
it's a it's a way of thinking about
areas of philosophy that i think are
useful what he said what wittgenstein
said ludwig wittgenstein said of his own
philosophy because his basic thesis was
philosophy as a discipline is useless
that it doesn't contribute anything to
knowledge all you need is things like
mathematics and science and philosophy
itself doesn't actually solve any
problems and this was a great schism
between the people who follow
wittgenstein and the people who follow
poppa papa thinks there are genuine
philosophical problems figenstein thinks
it's all word games so there is this
deep conflict between these two ideas
and then of course people would object
to wittgenstein and say well hold on you
are doing philosophy
how can you say all the philosophy is
useless and he granted it and had a very
clever way of granting it he said
his own philosophy is kind of like a
ladder a ladder that you use to climb
out of a deep well
the well-being philosophy once you've
climbed out of the world using the
latter you can do away with the ladder
you no longer have any need for the
ladder so once you've understood his
philosophy you understand that all of
philosophy including his own is
completely useless so get on with your
life and just do science
now i disagree with all of that quite
obviously people who don't think
that philosophy is important are liable
to say things like
well
the evidence shows incontrovertibly x
you can't debate the science because the
evidence shows
not realizing that for example evidence
needs to be interpreted and that's not a
matter of science that's a matter of
philosophy that the claim that evidence
needs to be to be interpreted that
evidence doesn't speak for itself but
rather many scientists
and others who reject the importance of
philosophy will make claims like this
that all you need to do is to
extrapolate the data and then you've got
a trend and you're doing science that's
not science science is about explanation
but that claim that science about is a
bad explanation is itself philosophical
so we have a problem in philosophy papa
was right
is science about just predicting stuff
is that all it's about
or is it about explanation
that's a philosophical problem the
solution is it's about explanation
because you can't make predictions
without explanations anyway so anyone
who's making the opposite case is
already trying to pull them up and
themselves up by their bootstraps and
they have no bootstraps because there is
no way of predicting stuff without a
pre-existing explanation okay but that's
beside the point
popper wins the argument but
wittgenstein had a good quip
use certain philosophies to climb out of
the well and so what i want to say here
is that with chapter seven it's kind of
like a ladder
to be used to climb out of the well of
justificationism
and so the rungs of the latter will now
and again include the word justified and
justification
and
david objects to it so already we can
concede david agrees that he he said he
would avoid the use of these words and
so i'm going to highlight some uses of
the word where i think you could get
away with it and other areas where i
think you might not want to get away
with where you'd want to say something
different or the word justified is
simply superfluous you can just do away
with it but what david says in the audio
book in the introduction is words to the
effector you need to interpret in this
chapter the use of the word justified as
kind of a
moral or methodological
claim about what should be done in other
words a normative claim so if something
is justified it's not justifying
something as true
or justifying something that's probably
true that's the error of
justificationism but when david says in
this chapter that something is justified
what he means is that you should use the
best explanation should okay should
you're justified in using the best
explanation and that's a reasonable use
of the word justified the whole chapter
is about this idea that there are these
two people on the top of the eiffel
tower david and the crypto inductivist
and they're having this debate about
why one shouldn't jump off the eiffel
tower
after all
if you can't justify as true
the theory that if you do jump off
you're going to hit the ground okay
general relativity or newtonian gravity
or whatever else that allows you to make
that prediction if you're not justified
in thinking it's true then there's no
reason not to jump off and just think
you're going to float to the ground
isn't that the way that science works
well no it's not
you're justified in not jumping off the
eiffel tower because the best
explanation is
theories of gravity that we have that
predict you're going to hit the ground
not justified as true
but justified in following the best
explanation what's the alternative not
follow the best explanation and in fact
follow a bad explanation like you're
going to float to the ground there's no
explanation there what is the mechanism
that would allow you to float to the
ground we don't need to justify as true
the idea that if you jump you're going
to fall to the ground
it's not
100 absolutely certain
whatever level of confidence you want to
put on this thing that if you jump off
the eiffel tower you're going to hit the
ground after all we can always imagine
ridiculous scenarios like
immediately where you thought you were
jumping off into empty air that someone
had put a very fine net beneath you that
you couldn't see and as soon as you
jumped you hit the net safely and you
never hit the ground there could be all
sorts of reasons
of
extremely low likelihood that you can
imagine that would mean that you didn't
hit the ground so it's not absolutely
certain
things might not be justified true but
that's not important
all of these exceptions to the reasons
why you wouldn't hit the ground are
completely able to be ignored because
you have a best good explanation general
relativity that predicts anything
leaping off the eiffel tower is going to
accelerate at 9.8 metres per second
squared towards the ground and in fact
not accelerate general relativity but
you get my meaning you're going to hit
the ground the ground and you are going
to come into contact you're going to be
dead
are you justified in thinking that's
true
no
are you justified in relying upon the
best explanation yes so that's the way
in which we're going to understand the
word justified here now
all of that is extremely technical
inside baseball to some extent
epistemology these are debates within
popularian circles that have been had
about the use of particular words
but why we're getting hung up on words i
don't know that's very vit constituent
okay we can just explain the ideas
explain the ideas without
worrying too much about what words
people use because all words have
ambiguity as we've already said you know
it reminds me a little one more final
thing reminds me a little
of
this word conjecture or guess
all knowledge is conjectural
and so we say it's been guessed which is
true from what we understand now about
the period of epistemology knowledge is
conjectural but every single claim that
you can make is a guess as well so what
makes the difference between
a conjecture like
general relativity
or evolution by natural selection
or
the movement of tectonic plates or how
quasars work
or
what the ultimate cause of the covert 19
virus was whatever the conjectures are
that are out there they don't all stand
on equal footing the conjecture that
the curvature of space-time is what
is the explanation of gravity
and gives the illusion of a force of
gravity is conjectural it's a guess
but it is one which has survived many
many tests and there is nothing else
superior to it
other rivals have been refuted it's the
only one left standing currently
all experimental evidence is consistent
with it
that doesn't prove it true but it means
it can do something that no other rival
has been able to do but we still call it
conjectural knowledge it's a conjecture
it's a guess
but this word guess clearly is labeling
something like that
as well as something like
newton's theory of gravity which is
already known to be false and has been
refuted by eddington's experiment and of
course not merely eddington's experiment
but
any number of things that can only be
explained these days by
general relativity well in fact of
course gravity can only be explained
properly conceived by general relativity
so there's that but if the word guess is
to label that and the word guess is to
label newtonian gravity already refuted
and the word guess is to label something
like well i think gravity is just caused
by the fact that the earth loves the
objects on it and that's why they're
attracted to it and they tend to fall
towards it there is a force of love not
a force of gravity well that guess
that guess utterly uncoupled from
reality still counts as a guess
wrong though it is
you know explanationless though it is
so
this word guess i mean maybe we'll be
looking back the epistemology
descendants in the papyrian tradition
100 years from now might very well look
back to today and go
look at the misconceptions these people
were using back then they were using
these words conjecture and guess to
label a similar kind of a thing now we
know better
now we know what we should be saying in
these situations an explanation is
actually this
it's not really a guess it's something
else now i would say right now that it's
a guess it's really a guess of a kind
but i can only rely upon the best
knowledge i have at any given time i can
come up with other ideas but they're not
better than what i know at the moment i
wish they were then i could be proper
but i'm not i'm just communicating the
ideas and if i do think of something
that i genuinely think by my lights and
after having consulted other people and
tested it against reality and tested it
with conversations with other people if
then
i figured out that okay well now we can
make some further improvements on
popular and further improvements on
deutsche then i will do so but there's
no urgency for this i don't feel
compelled to try and do this at the
moment i don't see any particular
problems that need to be solved by doing
this by changing our language but
justification is one of these words
where we've learned better about how to
explain these concepts and it's going to
become clear in this chapter but again
as i say
i don't blame popper for the way in
which he wrote the logic of scientific
discovery he needed to persuade the
people that were important to the
project of trying to understand how
science works namely other philosophers
colleagues that kind of thing people are
going to spread the word he did as well
as he could and he refined his ideas in
subsequent books and so the subsequent
books are a far better read than what
the earlier ones were i think even he
would agree with that i don't know but
i'm you know your first work is always
going to be written for a particular
audience and be grappling with
misconceptions and trying to pull people
out of the misconceptions requires you
to at least explain what the
misconceptions are in the language that
people understand so this is why chapter
7 is written in this way and looked at
through the lens of the beginning of
infinity which only exists because of
the fabric of reality we can see that
there are
subtle differences
and ways of expressing things
that only in light of the beginning of
infinity does the fabric of reality
look in this sense
dated in terms of the terminology but
not the central ideas so that's a long
preamble now i'm going to get into the
reading
david begins the chapter with a quote
from karl popper
and carl popper said quote i think that
i have solved a major philosophical
problem
the problem of induction end quote let's
begin with david david says quote as i
explained in the preface this book is
not primarily a defense of the
fundamental theories of the four main
strands it is an investigation
of what those theories say and what
sorts of reality they describe
that is why i do not address opposing
theories in any depth
however
there is one opposing theory namely
common sense which reason requires me to
refute in detail wherever it seems to
conflict with what i am asserting
hence in chapter 2 i presented a root
and branch refutation of the common
sense idea that there is only one
universe in chapter 11 i shall do the
same for the common sense idea that time
flows
or that our consciousness
moves through time
in chapter 3 i criticized inductivism
the common sense idea that we form
theories about the physical world by
generalizing the results of observations
and that we justify our theories by
repeating those observations
i explained that inductive
generalization from observations is
impossible and that inductive
justification is invalid i explain that
inductivism rests upon a mistaken idea
of science as seeking predictions on the
basis of observations
rather than as seeking explanations
in response to problems end quote
pausing there my reflection now you can
see what i'm going to say here i guess
if you're a long time listener so much
of the beginning of infinity is being
prefaced here and it's easy to miss but
he is
david is highlighting right there the
genuine purpose of science it's not
about primarily prediction and
prediction from observations which have
been generalized from what has happened
in the past that's not what science is
about science is about
explanations now
seeking those explanations and finding
them that's the hard part because we
have to come up creatively with how to
account for the world but once we've
done that with a
grand theorem of some way a a story we
tell
about the mechanisms the causes the
effects
all of the
things that are possible in the world
and not possible in the world what are
ruled in and ruled out
perhaps from that some of that
especially in physics or chemistry in
the physical sciences maybe if you're
lucky then you can really control your
variables then perhaps
if you know that people aren't going to
get involved you might just
be able to make a prediction you might
be able to derive some claim about the
future or the past or even the present
from that good explanation
that's not the purpose of science that's
just a
happy fortunate result of your main
project which was to understand reality
so lucky for you out of that
understanding comes the capacity to
sometimes make a prediction in
particular circumstances
i'm qualifying all that because
so much of science isn't about the
predictions it really isn't
in fact sometimes science says things
are unpredictable
whole areas of biology unpredictable
you can't know what the mutation is
going to be on the genetic code it could
be anything that's just the way
evolution works it's blind it throws up
the
unpredictable the inherently
unpredictable when you're making distant
forecasts about the future
people get involved and their choices
get involved and they create knowledge
and the creation of knowledge is
unpredictable causing their choices to
be inherently unpredictable
not determined by the prior state of the
universe in such a way that you can make
a prediction
so that can't be the purpose of science
rather often
even if you have a good scientific
theory
it often doesn't allow you to make this
distant prediction
about what's going to happen to the
earth
ten
or a thousand years from now because
people will have done stuff that's going
to change whatever your prediction is
from your current best scientific
explanation is which might very well be
overturned any time between the next ten
and a thousand years
okay so let's keep on going david says
quote i also explained following papa
how science does make progress
by conjecturing new explanations and
then
choosing between the best ones by
experiment
all this is largely accepted by
scientists and philosophers of science
what is not accepted by most
philosophers is that this process is
justified let me explain end quote
so there we have the first use of the
word justified so what david has just
said
is
quote
what is not accepted by most
philosophers is that this process is
justified end quote
all i would change about that
would be something like
him saying
what is not accepted by most
philosophers is that this process is the
best explanation of how science works or
the only known explanation of how
science works there are no rivals to
whatever way you want to put it it's not
justified in the sense of being
justified as true but we can interpret
this use of the word justified as saying
that this process is what you should
follow if you want to produce
good explanations
if you want to actually achieve the aim
of science of understanding the world of
comprehending things and solving
problems that's the sense in which it's
justified not justified as true but
justified as being the thing you should
do
methodologically this is the the way in
which things work that's all that means
david goes on first prefacing it by
saying quote let me explain science
seeks better explanations a scientific
explanation accounts for our
observations by postulating something
about what reality is like and how it
works
we deem an explanation to be better if
it leaves fewer loose ends such as
entities whose properties are themselves
unexplained requires fewer and simpler
postulates is more general meshes more
easily with good explanations in other
fields and so on end quote just pausing
there there's an interesting just
addition i'd put on that which is
again and this is directly from david
deutch where he says just there a
scientific explanation accounts for our
observations by postulating something
about what reality is like
so when he says that about what reality
is like he's invoking the things that
you don't see
so what reality is like
usually includes a whole bunch of unseen
phenomena and the way in which you
can determine which of the unseen
phenomena is real or not is by the scene
the scene of your observations
you look at what's going on in this with
the sun
you take measurements of the amount of
light
you
figure out how fast the earth is going
around the sun that tells you about the
mass of the sun
you can tell the rate at which energy is
being produced from the sun given its
mass and you constrain what processes
could possibly be causing this amount of
energy and you rule out something like
well it's chemical burning it's
combustion
which is the only other fire that we
know of
and you say well we've got to come up
with something better and eventually you
end up with
nuclear fusion nuclear fusion reactions
have to be powering that sun
you can't see the nuclear fusion
reactions impossible number one they're
so far away they're deep in the core of
the sun nothing could actually get there
they involve the nuclei of hydrogen
atoms the smallest
nuclei of all single protons being
bashed together to form helium that
can't be seen it's the unseen but
it's something we're postulating
something about what reality is like
reality is like that that's what's
really going on inside of the sun
to some approximation
other things are there mysteries there
are there going to be problems that
arise with that
i would say no doubt there will be
eventually an observation from the sun
will be inconsistent with something we
know about the rate of reactions who
knows maybe in the center there's more
than merely hydrogen going on there
maybe there's something else i don't
know maybe the triple alpha process
actually begins much earlier okay this
is getting to the technical
astrophysical details who knows what
could be found but i would be far more
surprised were nothing found over the
next century with respect to what we
understand about
solar nuclear physics
solar nuclear stellar nuclear synthesis
then if there were not something found
i'd be far more surprised were
something not found than if something
was found
something new was found an observation
inconsistent with that theory that i
just gave you about what's going on in
the sun
with the fusion the pp chain the
so-called pp chain the proton protons
being bashed together to make helium or
the cno cycle where carbon nitrogen
oxygen are used to do basically the same
thing the outcome being
helium being produced from
protons being fused together i can
readily imagine
someone coming along and overturning
fred hoyle's
you know the conception of how all of
this stuff works
which has remained relatively unchanged
for decades
so i'd be surprised if that stands in
exactly the same form for for centuries
i would expect that someone clever will
find
wrinkles with it there is with it big or
small okay let's keep on going david
writes quote but why should a better
explanation be what we always assume it
to be in practice namely the token of a
truer theory
why for that matter should a downright
bad explanation one which has none of
the above attributes say necessarily be
false
there is indeed no logically necessary
connection between truth and explanatory
power
a bad explanation such as solipsism may
be true
even the best and truest available
theory may make a false prediction in
particular cases and those might be the
very cases in which we rely on the
theory no valid form of reasoning can
logically rule out such possibilities or
even prove them unlikely but in that
case what justifies our relying on our
best explanations as guides to practical
decision making more generally whatever
criteria we use to judge scientific
theories how could the fact that a
theory satisfy those criteria today
possibly imply anything about what will
happen if we rely on the theory tomorrow
end quote yeah so we we don't prove as
true things in science we tend not to
prove things at all that's not the
metric we're explaining stuff
bad explanations are to a penny
something like solipsism the idea that
maybe only you exist and you're just
dreaming everything into reality maybe
that's true it's a bad explanation
because it can be infinitely varied in
subtle ways maybe it's just you and your
best friend that are dreaming everything
into reality maybe it's everyone on
earth dreaming everything into reality
everyone but one person dreaming
everything into reality you can
infinitely vary this okay it's a it's a
single computer it's two computers it's
one computer inside of another computer
simulating the universe it's an infinite
number of computers gets a countably
infinite number of computers it's an
uncountably infinite number of computers
name your solipsistic idea that base
reality is different to just realism
physical reality exists
okay we're being deceived by the the
demon these are solidistic arguments
they're infinitely varied and that's
what makes them a bad explanation a bad
explanation by the terms of easily
varied
swap out one computer for 10 computers
if we're all living in a simulation who
cares it doesn't make any difference
but it makes a huge difference
to the good explanation of for example
the sun is producing the energy that it
does by fusion power and that particular
reaction that's going on is typically
regarded as a majority of pp chain
reactions hydrogen nuclei directly
colliding with hydrogen nuclei to
produce heavier forms of hydrogen and
eventually ending up with helium-4
nuclei which eventually is the only
product left once all the hydrogen is
consumed then the sun expands and the
core heats up and you end up with a
triple alpha reaction in a reaction of
something called the helium flash and so
on it goes there's a good explanation i
can't swap out
protons for electrons in that situation
i can't change the hydrogen for carbon
i can't change the helium for nitrogen
this is a hard to vary explanation
i can't say there's more than the
required number of protons in the pp
chain to produce the reaction required i
can't say it's fission rather than
fusion
hard to vary every single component of
the good explanation serves a purpose
unlike solipsism where
no particular version is a good
explanation no particular version is a
good explanation it's all the same
whether you're dreaming stuff into
reality or the demon is deceiving you or
it's a simulation or you're stuck in a
cave
whatever it happens to be
these are bad explanations easily varied
and that's that's what we got from the
beginning of infinity and what you can
see here it's already there in seed form
in the fabric of reality but here david
is wondering well well his opponents
rather are wondering wondering asking
the question
if we can't justify the theory true
today how can we possibly rely on it
tomorrow
if we don't know what's true today why
should you rely on this thing tomorrow i
think it's just a
silly question but that's what
philosophers ask and they still ask it
today and this is what bayesians are
worried about and various other people
well if you don't know it's true or
you're confident it's true or you think
it's probably true
for what possible reason could you rely
on this theory
you have to have a reason for justifying
the theory is true
it actually never comes up in real life
science right you either have an
explanation or you don't and
rather often if you're doing real
science if you're solving problems you
don't have an explanation that's your
whole problem to begin with you've got
to come up with an explanation and once
you come up with one you're not going to
justify it as true you're going to test
it and it survives the test where you've
got nothing else to fall back on you
better use that theory in order to
continue to solve problems or you've got
nothing
but as for justifying as true this is
philosophical naval gazing it doesn't
solve any problem to to go down this
road
taking up too much intellectual energy
to even discuss the problem but some
people need to be pulled out of it i
want to save the potential philosophers
and philosophers now and scientists now
who are wasting their time writing books
and delivering lectures and trying to
educate people and teaching cohorts of
students about this rubbish because it's
a waste of brain power when they could
be doing other stuff
doing important stuff solving actual
problems rather than learning
misconceptions it really is for a
papillion
who understands how knowledge is created
it really is like generation upon
generation
of people being taught creationism when
you know
darwinism is out there neo-darwinism is
out there that's what it's like so why
wouldn't you do something why why was
darwin and haldane so
animated about trying to
persuade people
of
evolution by natural selection why was
it important to people to try and win
that argument to explain stuff because
people were wasting their time
problems needed to be solved there was
important biology to be done
and if people are wasting their time
they're trying to better understand how
creationism could work
by by inventing variations of it like
intelligent design
the real biologists know that this is
all completely misconceived and a waste
of intellectual power a waste of
humanity and in the same way
we want to save people from
inductivism and versions of it like the
modern intelligent design version called
bayesian epistemology we want to save
them from because if only they took all
of that energy and effort
and put it into
genuine creation of knowledge which is
optimistic and conjectural and allows
for the open-ended
stream of knowledge creation so that we
can become the hub in the universe where
the beginning of infinity really begins
as david dodge explains then we need to
help people learn this stuff persuade
them that their present world view is
mired in misconception and they're being
held back that's the other thing you
don't want people to be held back to be
perpetually confused not understanding
why
things aren't working and rejecting
popper out of hand because there are so
many people out there
prominent people out there who just
detest the philosopher
for reasons that still escape people
possibly because papa didn't like
academic philosophy and philosophers he
didn't have kind things to say at times
about
the the entire project that they are
engaged in because it was a waste of
time as i'm speaking now it doesn't
sound kind but what else can you do
when you just see
children young students university
people being
indoctrinated with the wrong ideas it's
exactly like the feeling
that
rationalist people have
when they say
that it's a waste of intellectual power
for so many people to be taught
creationism
young earth creationism
yeah it is
they should learn something better
but the adults don't know better and so
this is the situation we're in where the
philosophers don't know better the
scientists don't know but and and
perhaps the papillion sometimes sound
arrogant as perhaps i do we've got the
answers but we do what else can you do
how else can you behave when you have
the answers uh i think generally we're
we're pretty kind fun people by the way
when we do explain this stuff i'm not
berating people and if no one wants to
hear this i don't have to hear this
you have to tune into my podcast
okay let some keep on going david is
wondering you know how can we rely on
the theory tomorrow if the theory today
isn't justified he says quote
this is the modern form of the problem
of induction most philosophers are now
content with papa's contention that new
theories are not inferred from anything
but are merely hypotheses they also
accept that scientific progress is made
through conjectures and refutations as
described in chapter three and that
theories are accepted when their rivals
are refuted and not by virtue of
numerous confirming instances they
accept that the knowledge obtained in
this way tends in the event to be
reliable the problem is they do not see
why it should be traditional
inductivists tried to formulate a
principle of induction which said that
confirming instances made a theory more
likely or that the future will resemble
the past or some such statement they
also tried to formulate an inductive
scientific methodology laying down rules
for what sorts of inferences one could
validly draw from data they all failed
for the reasons i have explained but
even if they had succeeded in the sense
of constructing a scheme that could be
followed successfully to create
scientific knowledge this would not have
solved the problem of induction as it is
nowadays understood for in that case
induction would simply be another way of
choosing theories and the problem would
remain of why those theories should be a
reliable basis for action
in other words philosophers who worry
about this problem of induction are not
inductivists in the old fashioned sense
they do not try to obtain or justify any
theories inductively they do not expect
the sky to fall in but they did not know
how to justify that expectation
end quote yes and so
modern day
bayesians
who i encounter
they do tend to accept this idea that
you can refute theories now i still
don't understand how and you speak to
them and of course number one
they're typically not using bazel's
theorem that's the first thing
insofar as they are that is the very
rare exception to the rule people will
call themselves bayesians but never
actually employ bayes's theorem in
assessing actually calculating the
probability or likelihood of a
particular theory but insofar as they do
they accept that a refutation takes the
probability of the truth of the theory
to zero i don't know how that happens i
don't think they do either but they they
accept refutation but they do think that
confirming instances are a thing that
the more often you observe something
happening the more confident you can be
and that seems to be common sense to
them maybe it is common sense to a
certain person you know you see
something happens three times in a row
four times in a row five times in a row
well then you should expect it it's the
sun rising kind of thing
okay you've seen the sun rise on you
know five occasions before you expect
the sun to rise tomorrow or ever since
you were born you've seen the sun rise
and so you continue to think the sun's
going to rise and of course the whole
ravens thing or the swans whatever
you've seen
white swans forever so you assume all
swans are white therefore you know why
should you expect a black swan these
trope examples are the ones that can
tend to crop up but of course you know
it's like the the gambler's long run
fallacy you know you're flipping a coin
and you know it's ten heads in a row do
you expect the eleventh head to be heads
knowing it's a fair coin well that's the
thing do you know it's a fair coin all
of this stuff are problems for bayesians
but not problems for papyrians who want
good explanations and not merely
predictions
inductivists are the same well bayesians
are inductivists that's what they are
they seek predictions that they see that
the purpose of science is about being
able to make a prediction they're
looking at
observations they're focused on
observations on the evidence on trying
to confirm the evidence as being true or
probably true indicating a trend that is
likely more or less and therefore
whether the trend can continue and
therefore they've got graphs and it all
looks very scientific when you speak to
bayesians and when you look at their
presentations they have lovely graphs
lots of data and and so they can
they're ruling things in and out on the
basis of confidence
number of observations so on and so
forth but in real life science what
we're looking for is creative
conjectures grand explanations
hard to come by accounts of the world
stories we tell when i say story i don't
mean fictional story i mean a word words
in natural language
that invoke
things that really exist out there in
reality
the the causal links between them
the relationships between them i should
say and
why what is happening is happening why
and then from that you might get a
prediction you might be able to talk
about trends and things but that that
that's a side point that's a derivative
thing not the central part of the
philosophy of science of science of
epistemology it just isn't
this is why induction is not a thing
merely observing stuff observing is just
there as a test of the theory guest
the observation might throw up a problem
in which case
let's come up with an explanation of why
this problem exists was the observation
made poorly was the method methodology
used to generate the observation there
was a problem with the telescope apps or
the microscope or the large hadron
collider with your scientific instrument
with your eyes you look up in the sky
and you think you've seen a ufo ah
observation
well no
you've seen something
up there it doesn't mean there's aliens
flying from another galaxy here to earth
then you've got a theory and now let we
need observations to rule that out
possibly we need alternatives we have a
whole bunch of alternative
hypotheses about what that thing could
have been in the sky
and you need ways of ruling out all the
other things like
human-made aircraft
venus
shooting star or meteor any number of
things weather balloon
on that list yeah sure let's throw the
intergalactic space traveler but absent
anything else why we're jumping to that
one i don't know but you know this is
the this is what passes for the way in
which people think science is done and
if they think they continue to see night
after night after night after night
particular lights in the sky they're
becoming more and more confident that
their favorite theory is
more likely to be true this is the
bayesian way of thinking and so
therefore tomorrow they're going to see
the same lights in the sky aha
aliens are traveling from the other side
of the galaxy or something like that so
david talks about modern day
philosophers as perhaps not being
inductivists in the old sense i think
some are when it comes to bayesianism
some kind of are
they they they worry about you know how
to justify as true their theories
if anything
if there's anything to go by with the
modern movement of bayesianism that
that's what people think
because they've only been fed a certain
way of
they're not philosophers to begin with
okay many people who
title them self-styled
bayesians today
in the rationalist community
they'd read about bayesianism that's it
that's a blinkered view never considered
anything more broadly in
philosophy or epistemology
it's just
bayesian reasoning
and it's mathematical and i love maths
because maybe they're coders and or
they're engineers and so they they
understand the the basic ideas so
hey it's a formula it can be you can
even code it in the computer and it can
spit out numbers for you and it can be
used for so-called machine learning even
though it's not learning but it can
extrapolate data
and it'll even help your robot navigate
around hey
works works for generating theories now
it works for
basis theorem works
for specific things but i've got whole
episodes on this look at the stephen
pinker most recent uh episode on that
all about basis theorem for that i've
been talking about it a lot recently so
i won't go back down that road now where
basis theorem can narrowly be used and
where it certainly isn't a philosophy of
science or an epistemology okay so
that that's what we're talking about
here but there are philosophers who are
not inductivists in the old fashioned
sense david says but i'll continue he
writes quote they do not try to obtain
or justify any theories inductively they
do not expect the sky to fall in but
they do not know how to justify that
expectation philosophers today yearn for
this missing justification they no
longer believe that induction would
provide it yet they have an induction
shaped gap in their scheme of things
just as religious people who have lost
their faith suffer from a god-shaped gap
in their scheme of things but in my
opinion there is little difference
between having an x-shaped gap in one
scheme of things and believing in x
hence to fit in with the more
sophisticated conception of the problem
of induction i wish to redefine the term
inductivist to mean someone who believes
that the invalidity of inductive
justification is a problem for the
foundations of science
pausing there my reflection just on the
god-shaped gap thing yeah so religious
people who lose their faith have a
god-shaped gap
you see this all the time especially in
morality
say something controversial here
altruism and this idea of collectivism
it's a tribal idea so religions
inherited this idea that the tribe is
more important than the individual
obviously that was a thing in the tribe
religions took it on and then whole
political movements have taken it on now
atheists who reject religion kind of
atheists we should say who reject god
and then
think of themselves as very rational
people because they've rejected god tend
not to reject
many many of the tenants of religion now
of course they might become political
activists and say well i hate the
catholic church for example and i am
very pro-abortion let's say so clearly
i'm not a religious thinker but
many many of these people
will hold high this notion of altruism
self-sacrifice where does the concept of
self-sacrifice being a virtue come from
altruism is not generosity i've written
blog posts about this in podcasts about
this before people who reject god and
reject mainstream religion and by the
way i don't regard myself as a religious
person but i understand the
fraught errors in simply rejecting
religion and having nothing to replace
it with
because if you reject
god
and you reject mainstream religion
especially the one in which you are
raised from mother's knee and you have
nothing to replace it with it will be
filled by everything that was in that
religion and it will become a political
ideology for example
christianity well teaches that the
ultimate person is jesus christ he
sacrificed his life for the rest of
humanity that was the greatest thing
that could have been done he was
altruistic he spoke of altruism give up
your wealth and follow him this is the
ideal that we are supposed to strive for
and many
many
atheist people still endorse the lessons
they might reject god rejected jesus
perform miracles reject that jesus is
the son of god or perhaps even reject
that jesus ever existed but insofar as
he had wisdom there they still read
wisdom into the new testament of that
kind namely sacrifice yourself
don't merely be generous give and give
and give until it hurts a little the
best thing you can do is to have your
life set up so that it is
for the service of others again i am not
saying don't be generous i am not saying
don't be kind and compassionate you
should be generous kind and
compassionate absolutely some of the
most wonderful experiences people can
have in life is helping others
absolutely but what christianity does in
particular is it goes a step further
it says yeah do all that but continue to
do it until it hurts continue to do it
until a little blood is drawn until you
begin to suffer a little it's in the
suffering that you actually find true
virtue and your true calling now
buddhism speaks that you know all life
is suffering which i disagree with i
think that suffering is just a problem
that can be solved and christianity says
if you suffer this is great it's your
cross to bear you should be seeking the
cross to bear you should be suffering
you should be
sacrificing yourself for others if
you've got a million dollars to give
away don't invest it in a company that's
not going to do the greatest good give
it away give it to a charity where it
will absolutely help people now dwight
am i arguing against charity no what i'm
saying is it's not evil to invest that
million dollars and i'm not saying it's
better to put it into charity give it to
charity if you want yeah absolutely
you're going to help people in
particular charities you could invest it
in a company like apple which is going
to produce even better iphones that are
going to help millions and millions of
people be lifted out of poverty that's
literally what happens with technology
and you would be a part of that if you
invest in some corporations giving it
away to poor people now is also going to
help them yeah absolutely but why
a christian for example would say no
absolutely the only way of helping
people the only way is to give it to
charity because that's going to hurt you
you're not going to earn anything from
that except a good feeling but investing
money well you're going to make a profit
you'll also feel good and in fact you're
not supposed to feel good if you do that
by the way if you invest in a company
that does really well you're not
supposed to feel good and virtuous
you're not supposed to you're supposed
to feel a little bit guilty you haven't
sacrificed anything the opposite but why
shouldn't you feel good if the company
you invest in does well
and is selling products to people and
giving services to people lifting the
entire state of civilization to a higher
level of flourishing that's a great
thing that's a virtuous thing people
have a god-shaped gap people have a
religion shape gap so atheists often
just have the morality of christianity
they endorse almost everything about
christianity
except the god bit
except that jesus be although the
example of jesus they think is good yeah
effective altruism is absolutely that
it's absolutely that it is the modern
version of christianity without jesus
it's a way of hear give away everything
follow me
and then
you will achieve bliss and happiness and
enlightenment i am not saying effective
altruists are not doing good work they
are
what i'm saying is
that altruism is not the most effective
way of doing good generosity is a higher
calling because there are many ways in
which to be generous
investing in people rather than simply
giving it away investing in people means
you may get a return you might not as
well you might lose it all but hey with
charity you absolutely lose it all in
the sense that it's gone from you to
someone else is that bad no it's not bad
but in the same way that
investing in someone who's got a good
idea as a startup and makes lots of
money and you make lots of money is also
not bad
for you
it's no less good just because you make
a profit but i'm getting off topic okay
that's a rant on
precisely this thing of
some people who lose their faith suffer
from a god-shaped gap that's what david
thought that kind of thing people want
to believe in something believe in the
higher power of some sort and in
particular i want to have a morality
that is basically just traditional
religion
and there are alternatives to that look
up i think my my blog post is um
christian atheists something like that
and i've got a podcast out there about
it as well let's keep going um i'm only
going to read a little bit more and then
we get to the actual discussion itself
which i'm going to leave for part two so
this is just the introduction
lengthier than i thought so david has
just said quote and i'll read on a bit
further i wish to redefine the term
inductivist to mean someone who believes
that the invalidity of inductive
justification is a problem for the
foundations of science
in other words an inductivist believes
there is a gap which must be filled if
not by a principle of induction than by
something else
some inductivists do not mind being so
designated others do so i shall call
them crypto-inductivists
most contemporary philosophers are
crypto-inductivists
what makes matters worse is that like
many scientists they grossly underrate
the role of explanation in the
scientific process so the most papyrian
anti-inductivists who are thereby led to
deny that there is any such thing as
justification even tentative
justification
this opens up a new explanatory gap in
their scheme of things
the philosopher john warrell has
dramatised the problem as he sees it in
an imaginary dialogue between popper and
several other philosophers entitled why
both popper and watkins fail to solve
the problem of induction
this setting is the top of the eiffel
tower
one of the participants the floater
decides to descend by jumping over the
side instead of using the lift in the
normal way the others try to persuade
the floater that jumping off means
certain death
they used the best available scientific
and philosophical arguments but the
infuriating floater still expects to
float down safely and keeps pointing out
that no rival explanation can logically
be proved to be preferable on the basis
of past experience pause there my
reflection yeah of course
it's the wrong question isn't it
the floater is right that
no rival explanation can logically be
proved to be preferable yeah we can't
logically prove it but science isn't
about logical proof and if you're
looking for that bar the bar is so high
you're never going to meet it what we're
after is good explanations we're after
actual knowledge we're after a situation
in which we literally do have no rivals
we've got one explanation this is the
explanation this is what's going to
happen is it absolutely certain no is it
known to be true no is it probably true
no it's just the only explanation we
have and if you want to rely on
something else in particular you want to
rely on a bad explanation that's on you
the rest of us are not going to jump off
the eiffel tower because we've got a
good explanation it's a very very good
explanation it's been tested in many
many different ways in many different
situations
i am
justified in not jumping off justified
in the sense that i should not jump off
the eiffel tower
and thinking i will not float to the
ground because
this best
only existing scientific explanation of
how gravity works and how masses in a
gravitational field behave
tells me enables me to predict i'm going
to hit the ground i can hit the ground
in such a way that i'll absolutely be
dead so you mr floater can rely on some
other explanation no not an explanation
but it doesn't enable you to make a
prediction your non-explanation is just
an assertion that you're going to float
it's prediction without explanation
explanationless science by what
mechanism are you going to float down
you have none
i have one that tells me that what
happens when you jump off the eiffel
tower is you fall
towards the ground
and increasing velocity
and you splat and all your bones break
and you die
this is what general relativity tells us
so what david goes on to say
is quote i believe that we can justify
our expectation the floater would be
killed the justification always
tentative of course comes from the
explanations provided by the relevant
scientific theories to the extent those
explanations are good it is rationally
justified to rely on the predictions of
corresponding theories so in reply to
warrel i now present a dialogue of my
own set in the same place
end quote and i won't begin
reading the dialogue now but that that
last paragraph there is a lot of use of
the word justified and i think we can
just do away that i think we can just
sort of say
something along the lines of
we know the floater would be killed
and when i say no
what i mean is
tentatively fallibly
relying upon our best explanation so i
would phrase it something like i know
that the floater would be killed this
claim comes from the explanations
provided by the relevant scientific
theories
to the extent those explanations are
good it is right to rely on the
predictions of the corresponding
theories so and reply to warrell and our
present dialogue of mine at no point do
i need to talk about justified at no
point do i need to use the word
justification i think david would be the
same now because it just introduces some
confusion
not because at that time in 1997 was he
ever wrong in saying this because you
need to speak in the language of your
opponents if you're if you're going to
make any headway quite often certainly
i've learned this
unless you're willing to grant certain
vocabulary there's no common ground they
just don't know what you're getting at
so when i try and say
you know trying to explain what
knowledge is or what the phrase i know
means well i have to begin where they
are people will say oh but you don't
really know that
and so i have to concede that where
they're coming from is when they say and
they emphasize no you don't know that
what they mean is i am certain that
okay and so i'll say to them well no you
can't be certain of that i'm not certain
of it either whereas what i really think
is of course certainty isn't a thing you
can't there's no such thing as certainty
there's this feeling right there's this
emotion you think that you label
certainty but even then that doesn't
mean that it's absolutely true
okay so there's all this deep
ocean of
background knowledge but you have to
meet someone who's coming from the
completely opposite perspective you have
to meet them somewhere so you have to
grant them you know certain words and
try and bring them with you for as long
as they're interested in being brought
with you and if they're not interested
and they give up well there you go you
don't have to force people into it you
know it's a it's it's an interesting
debate for as long as people want to
have it an interesting discussion i
should say
explaining world views to one another so
that's what we're doing and that's what
david is doing here
so i look forward to the next episode
where we go through some of the dialogue
i don't think i'll go through the entire
dialogue but
i think this is a really good chapter of
trying finally to undo this idea of
induction we've now of course
got the problem of bayesianism so how
much inroad we're making i don't know
it's hard to tell and what's the real
life consequence the real life
consequence is maybe machine learning
and artificial intelligence would do
better if they weren't so reliant on
bayesianism maybe there are better ways
to go maybe you know even like agi
obviously artificial general
intelligence clearly cannot possibly be
based on bayesian inference generation
that's clearly a misconception we can
rule that out but i don't know enough
about just mainstream normal ai to know
whether or not doing away with
bayesianism there
might be a good idea and that might be a
bit of a dead end there could be better
ways of producing so-called intelligent
systems just sophisticated computers
that that do a different job of kind of
guessing and conjecturing in some way i
don't know how that's for other people i
do what i do other people do what they
do but philosophy is important here
epistemology is important here if we
want technology to be better people have
to understand the way knowledge is
generated
because that's how progress happens
not merely in the rarified areas of
philosophy and science
but in engineering and technology and
just everywhere in life but that's
enough for now
until next time bye-bye
[Music]
oh
[Applause]
um
[Music]
uh